# whats is algorithm
- Algorithm is a step by step procedure, which defines a set of instructions to be executed in a certain order to get the desired output. Algorithms are generally created independent of underlying languages, i.e. an algorithm can be implemented in more than one programming language.
- From the data structure point of view, following are some important categories of algorithms −
    - Search − Algorithm to search an item in a data structure.
    - Sort − Algorithm to sort items in a certain order.
    - Insert − Algorithm to insert item in a data structure.
    - Update − Algorithm to update an existing item in a data structure.
    - Delete − Algorithm to delete an existing item from a data structure.

input data -> algorithm -> output data
example: 
    - input data: a[0..n-1]
    - output data: Ea(a[0], a[1], a[2], ..., a[n-1])
    - algorithm: 
        ```
        s = 0             - 1
        for i = 0 to n-1  - 2n
            s = s + a[i]  - 3n
        print s           - 1
        ```

## Time Complexity
- Time complexity of an algorithm quantifies the amount of time taken by an algorithm to run as a function of the length of the input. Similarly, space complexity of an algorithm quantifies the amount of space or memory taken by an algorithm to run as a function of the length of the input.

- the time complexity of the above algorithm is O(n). As the value of n increases, the time taken by the algorithm increases linearly.

 - T(n) = 2 + 5n = O(n)
 - f(n) = O(g(n)) if there exists a positive real number c and a real number n0 such that f(n) <= c.g(n) for all n > n0

    - 2 + 5n = O(n)
    - n0 = 1, c = 7
    - 2 + 5n <= 7n

# Sorting Algorithm
- Sorting is the process of arranging the elements in a list in a specific order (either ascending or descending).
- There are many different ways to sort data. The most common ways are:
    - insertion
    - Bubble Sort
    - Selection
    - Merge
    - Quick
    - Heap
    - Radix
## Insertion Sort
```
for i = 1 to n-1
    j = i
    while j > 0 and A[j-1] > A[j]
        swap A[j] and A[j-1]
        j = j - 1
```
- time complexity: 
 best case O(n), average case O(n^2), worst case O(n^2)

## Merge Sort
```
sort(a):
    if a.length < 2:
        return a
    left = sort(a[0..n/2])
    right = sort(a[n/2+1..n])
    left = sort(left)
    right = sort(right)
    return merge(left, right)

merge(left, right):
    result = []
    while left and right:
        if left[0] < right[0]:
            result.append(left[0])
            left = left[1..]
        else:
            result.append(right[0])
            right = right[1..]
    while left:
        result.append(left[0])
        left = left[1..]
    while right:
        result.append(right[0])
        right = right[1..]
    return result
```

    
